README.md, before:

# ZuCo EEG Dataset Extraction Pipeline

A robust Python pipeline for extracting and modernizing word-level EEG data from the ZuCo (Zurich Cognitive Language Processing Corpus) dataset. This tool converts MATLAB files into organized HDF5 format with preserved sentence context, perfect for EEG-language model alignment research.

Full extracted data can be found on [ZuCo 2.0 fork on OSF](https://osf.io/wq6ps/)

## Features

- ✅ **Dual Version Support**: Handles both ZuCo 1.0 and ZuCo 2.0 datasets
- ✅ **Sentence Context Preservation**: Maintains full sentence text and word positions for LLM alignment
- ✅ **Resume Capability**: Checkpoint system allows interrupting and resuming extraction
- ✅ **Efficient Storage**: Separate HDF5 files per subject-task with LZF compression
- ✅ **Progress Tracking**: Real-time progress bars for all operations
- ✅ **Robust Error Handling**: Gracefully handles missing data and format variations

## Prerequisites

- Python 3.8 (recommended for MATLAB compatibility) or Python 3.13+ (verified compatible)
- Conda or Miniconda
- ~50GB free disk space for full dataset
- ZuCo dataset files (download instructions below)

## Installation

### 1. Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/extract_zuco_data.git
cd extract_zuco_data
```

### 2. Download ZuCo Dataset

Create the data directory structure and download the datasets:

```bash
# Create the data directory
mkdir -p zuco_data/zuco1.0
mkdir -p zuco_data/zuco2.0
```

#### Download ZuCo 1.0
1. Go to https://osf.io/q3zws/files/osfstorage
2. Download all folders:
   - `task1-SR/`
   - `task2-NR/`
   - `task3-TSR/`
3. Place them in `zuco_data/zuco1.0/`

#### Download ZuCo 2.0
1. Go to https://osf.io/2urht/files/osfstorage
2. Download all folders:
   - `task1 - NR/`
   - `task2 - TSR/`
   - `preprocessed/` (optional)
   - `scripts/` (contains useful reference scripts)
3. Place them in `zuco_data/zuco2.0/`

Your directory structure should look like:
```
extract_zuco_data/
├── zuco_data/
│   ├── zuco1.0/
│   │   ├── task1-SR/
│   │   │   └── Matlab files/
│   │   │       ├── results01_SR_ZAB.mat
│   │   │       ├── results02_SR_ZDM.mat
│   │   │       └── ...
│   │   ├── task2-NR/
│   │   │   └── Matlab files/
│   │   └── task3-TSR/
│   │       └── Matlab files/
│   └── zuco2.0/
│       ├── task1 - NR/
│       │   └── Matlab files/
│       │       ├── resultsYAC_NR.mat
│       │       ├── resultsYAG_NR.mat
│       │       └── ...
│       ├── task2 - TSR/
│       │   └── Matlab files/
│       └── scripts/
│           └── python_reader/
└── src/
    └── [all Python scripts]
```

### 3. Set Up Python Environment

#### Option A: Using the provided setup script
```bash
bash setup_environment.sh
```

#### Option B: Manual setup
```bash
# Create conda environment (Python 3.8 recommended)
conda create --prefix .conda/zuco_extract python=3.8
conda activate .conda/zuco_extract

# Or for Python 3.13+ compatibility
conda create --prefix .conda/zuco_py313 python=3.13
conda activate .conda/zuco_py313

# Install dependencies
pip install scipy numpy pandas matplotlib h5py
pip install tables pyarrow tqdm
```

## Usage

### Quick Test

Run a quick test to verify everything is working:

```bash
# Activate environment
conda activate .conda/zuco_extract

# Run test extraction (processes 4 sample files)
python src/test_extraction.py
```

This will create test files in `test_output/` and verify both ZuCo 1.0 and 2.0 extraction.

### Python 3.13 Compatibility Verification (Optional)

To verify the extracted data works with modern Python versions:

```bash
# Using Python 3.13 environment
conda activate .conda/zuco_py313

# Test HDF5 compatibility
python src/test_python313_compat.py

# Verify alignment across versions
python src/verify_alignment.py
```

### Full Extraction

Extract the complete dataset:

```bash
# Run full extraction with progress bars
python src/zuco_extraction_pipeline.py

# Monitor progress in another terminal
tail -f extraction_log.txt
```

**Expected runtime**: 30-45 minutes for all 72 files
**Output size**: ~5-10GB (compressed HDF5)

### Verify Extracted Data

After downloading the extracted HDF5 files from OSF, you can verify the extraction statistics:

```bash
# Recalculate extraction summary to verify data coverage
python src/recalculate_summary.py

# This will create extraction_summary_full.json with accurate counts
# Compare with the provided extraction_summary_full.json to verify consistency
```

This verification script analyzes all HDF5 files to count how many words actually contain EEG data, frequency bands, and fixation information. Expected coverage is approximately 50-80% of words having EEG recordings.

### Resume Interrupted Extraction

The pipeline automatically saves checkpoints. If interrupted, simply run the same command again:

```bash
python src/zuco_extraction_pipeline.py
# Will skip already completed files and resume from last checkpoint
```

## Output Structure

### File Organization

The pipeline creates separate HDF5 files for each subject-task combination:

```
extracted_data/
├── zuco1_ZAB_SR.h5       # ZuCo 1.0: 12 subjects × 3 tasks = 36 files
├── zuco1_ZAB_NR.h5
├── zuco1_ZAB_TSR.h5
├── ...
├── zuco2_YAC_NR.h5       # ZuCo 2.0: 18 subjects × 2 tasks = 36 files
├── zuco2_YAC_TSR.h5
├── ...
├── extraction_summary.json     # Statistics and metadata
└── extraction_checkpoint.json  # Resume tracking
```

### HDF5 Data Structure

Each HDF5 file contains word-level data with preserved sentence context:

```
zuco1_ZAB_SR.h5
├── word_00000/
│   ├── Attributes:
│   │   ├── word_content: "Henry"
│   │   ├── sentence_id: 0
│   │   ├── sentence_content: "Henry Ford, with his son..."
│   │   ├── word_index: 0
│   │   ├── task_name: "SR"
│   │   └── subject_id: "ZAB"
│   ├── raw_eeg         # Shape: (n_fixations, 105 electrodes)
│   ├── frequency_bands/
│   │   ├── FFD_t1      # Theta band 1 (4-6 Hz)
│   │   ├── FFD_t2      # Theta band 2 (6.5-8 Hz)
│   │   ├── FFD_a1      # Alpha band 1 (8.5-10 Hz)
│   │   ├── FFD_a2      # Alpha band 2 (10.5-13 Hz)
│   │   ├── FFD_b1      # Beta band 1 (13.5-18 Hz)
│   │   ├── FFD_b2      # Beta band 2 (18.5-30 Hz)
│   │   ├── FFD_g1      # Gamma band 1 (30.5-40 Hz)
│   │   └── FFD_g2      # Gamma band 2 (40-49.5 Hz)
│   └── eye_tracking/
│       ├── FFD         # First fixation duration
│       ├── TRT         # Total reading time
│       ├── GD          # Gaze duration
│       ├── GPT         # Go-past time
│       ├── SFD         # Single fixation duration
│       └── nFixations  # Number of fixations
├── word_00001/
└── ...
```

## Data Access Examples

### Python - Load extracted data

```python
import h5py
import numpy as np

# Load a specific subject-task file
with h5py.File('extracted_data/zuco1_ZAB_SR.h5', 'r') as f:
    # Access first word
    word_group = f['word_00000']
    
    # Get word and sentence information
    word = word_group.attrs['word_content']
    sentence = word_group.attrs['sentence_content']
    word_position = word_group.attrs['word_index']
    
    # Load EEG data
    raw_eeg = word_group['raw_eeg'][:]  # Shape: (n_fixations, 105)
    
    # Load frequency bands
    theta1 = word_group['frequency_bands/FFD_t1'][:]  # Shape: (105,)
    
    # Load eye-tracking metrics
    ffd = word_group['eye_tracking/FFD'][()]  # Scalar value
    
    print(f"Word: '{word}' at position {word_position}")
    print(f"Sentence: {sentence[:50]}...")
    print(f"Raw EEG shape: {raw_eeg.shape}")
```

### Reconstruct sentences for LLM processing

```python
import h5py
from collections import defaultdict

def get_sentences_from_file(filepath):
    """Reconstruct sentences from word-level data"""
    sentences = defaultdict(list)
    
    with h5py.File(filepath, 'r') as f:
        for word_key in f.keys():
            word_group = f[word_key]
            sent_id = word_group.attrs['sentence_id']
            word_idx = word_group.attrs['word_index']
            word_content = word_group.attrs['word_content']
            
            sentences[sent_id].append((word_idx, word_content))
    
    # Sort words by position and reconstruct
    reconstructed = {}
    for sent_id, words in sentences.items():
        words.sort(key=lambda x: x[0])
        reconstructed[sent_id] = ' '.join([w[1] for w in words])
    
    return reconstructed
```

## Dataset Information

### ZuCo 1.0
- **Subjects**: 12 native English speakers
- **Tasks**: 
  - SR: Sentiment Reading (400 sentences)
  - NR: Normal Reading (300 sentences)
  - TSR: Task-Specific Reading (407 sentences)
- **Known missing data**: ZDN, ZJS, ZPH, ZGW (partial recordings)

### ZuCo 2.0
- **Subjects**: 18 native English speakers
- **Tasks**:
  - NR: Normal Reading (349 sentences)
  - TSR: Task-Specific Reading (349 sentences)
- **Improvements**: Single-session recording (no session effects)

## Technical Details

### Requirements
- **Python 3.8+**: Optimal compatibility with MATLAB file formats (tested with 3.8 and 3.13)
- **Memory**: ~4GB RAM for processing
- **Storage**: ~50GB for raw data, ~10GB for extracted HDF5 files

### Performance
- **Extraction speed**: ~20-30 seconds per subject-task file
- **Compression**: LZF compression (5x faster than gzip)
- **Parallel processing**: Not implemented (files are independent, can run multiple instances)

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

1. **Memory errors during extraction**
   - Solution: The pipeline uses incremental saving to minimize memory usage
   - If issues persist, process fewer files at a time

2. **Missing data warnings**
   - Expected for subjects ZDN, ZJS, ZPH, ZGW in ZuCo 1.0
   - Pipeline handles these gracefully

3. **Deprecation warnings**
   - `nFixations` empty array warning is harmless and can be ignored

4. **HDF5 file corruption**
   - Delete the corrupted file and re-run extraction
   - Checkpoint system will resume from that file

## Citation

If you use this extraction pipeline in your research, please cite:

```bibtex
@article{hollenstein2018zuco,
  title={ZuCo, a simultaneous EEG and eye-tracking resource for natural sentence reading},
  author={Hollenstein, Nora and Rotsztejn, Jonathan and Troendle, Marius and Pedroni, Andreas and Zhang, Ce and Langer, Nicolas},
  journal={Scientific Data},
  volume={5},
  pages={180291},
  year={2018}
}

@article{hollenstein2020zuco2,
  title={ZuCo 2.0: A dataset of physiological recordings during English and Dutch reading},
  author={Hollenstein, Nora and Troendle, Marius and Zhang, Ce and Langer, Nicolas},
  journal={arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.14254},
  year={2020}
}
```

## License

This extraction pipeline is provided under the MIT License. The ZuCo dataset itself has its own licensing terms - please refer to the official ZuCo documentation.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit issues or pull requests.

## Acknowledgments

- ZuCo dataset creators at University of Zurich
- Official ZuCo 2.0 Python scripts provided helpful structure insights

Commit message:

added diff feature to recalculate summary (quality control for downloads)

README.md, after:

# ZuCo EEG Dataset Extraction Pipeline

A robust Python pipeline for extracting and modernizing word-level EEG data from the ZuCo (Zurich Cognitive Language Processing Corpus) dataset. This tool converts MATLAB files into organized HDF5 format with preserved sentence context, perfect for EEG-language model alignment research.

Full extracted data can be found on [ZuCo 2.0 fork on OSF](https://osf.io/wq6ps/)

## Features

- ✅ **Dual Version Support**: Handles both ZuCo 1.0 and ZuCo 2.0 datasets
- ✅ **Sentence Context Preservation**: Maintains full sentence text and word positions for LLM alignment
- ✅ **Resume Capability**: Checkpoint system allows interrupting and resuming extraction
- ✅ **Efficient Storage**: Separate HDF5 files per subject-task with LZF compression
- ✅ **Progress Tracking**: Real-time progress bars for all operations
- ✅ **Robust Error Handling**: Gracefully handles missing data and format variations

## Prerequisites

- Python 3.8 (recommended for MATLAB compatibility) or Python 3.13+ (verified compatible)
- Conda or Miniconda
- ~50GB free disk space for full dataset
- ZuCo dataset files (download instructions below)

## Installation

### 1. Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/extract_zuco_data.git
cd extract_zuco_data
```

### 2. Download ZuCo Dataset

Create the data directory structure and download the datasets:

```bash
# Create the data directory
mkdir -p zuco_data/zuco1.0
mkdir -p zuco_data/zuco2.0
```

#### Download ZuCo 1.0
1. Go to https://osf.io/q3zws/files/osfstorage
2. Download all folders:
   - `task1-SR/`
   - `task2-NR/`
   - `task3-TSR/`
3. Place them in `zuco_data/zuco1.0/`

#### Download ZuCo 2.0
1. Go to https://osf.io/2urht/files/osfstorage
2. Download all folders:
   - `task1 - NR/`
   - `task2 - TSR/`
   - `preprocessed/` (optional)
   - `scripts/` (contains useful reference scripts)
3. Place them in `zuco_data/zuco2.0/`

Your directory structure should look like:
```
extract_zuco_data/
├── zuco_data/
│   ├── zuco1.0/
│   │   ├── task1-SR/
│   │   │   └── Matlab files/
│   │   │       ├── results01_SR_ZAB.mat
│   │   │       ├── results02_SR_ZDM.mat
│   │   │       └── ...
│   │   ├── task2-NR/
│   │   │   └── Matlab files/
│   │   └── task3-TSR/
│   │       └── Matlab files/
│   └── zuco2.0/
│       ├── task1 - NR/
│       │   └── Matlab files/
│       │       ├── resultsYAC_NR.mat
│       │       ├── resultsYAG_NR.mat
│       │       └── ...
│       ├── task2 - TSR/
│       │   └── Matlab files/
│       └── scripts/
│           └── python_reader/
└── src/
    └── [all Python scripts]
```

### 3. Set Up Python Environment

#### Option A: Using the provided setup script
```bash
bash setup_environment.sh
```

#### Option B: Manual setup
```bash
# Create conda environment (Python 3.8 recommended)
conda create --prefix .conda/zuco_extract python=3.8
conda activate .conda/zuco_extract

# Or for Python 3.13+ compatibility
conda create --prefix .conda/zuco_py313 python=3.13
conda activate .conda/zuco_py313

# Install dependencies
pip install scipy numpy pandas matplotlib h5py
pip install tables pyarrow tqdm
```

## Usage

### Quick Test

Run a quick test to verify everything is working:

```bash
# Activate environment
conda activate .conda/zuco_extract

# Run test extraction (processes 4 sample files)
python src/test_extraction.py
```

This will create test files in `test_output/` and verify both ZuCo 1.0 and 2.0 extraction.

### Python 3.13 Compatibility Verification (Optional)

To verify the extracted data works with modern Python versions:

```bash
# Using Python 3.13 environment
conda activate .conda/zuco_py313

# Test HDF5 compatibility
python src/test_python313_compat.py

# Verify alignment across versions
python src/verify_alignment.py
```

### Full Extraction

Extract the complete dataset:

```bash
# Run full extraction with progress bars
python src/zuco_extraction_pipeline.py

# Monitor progress in another terminal
tail -f extraction_log.txt
```

**Expected runtime**: 30-45 minutes for all 72 files
**Output size**: ~5-10GB (compressed HDF5)

### Verify Extracted Data

After downloading the extracted HDF5 files from OSF, you can verify the extraction statistics:

```bash
# Recalculate extraction summary to verify data coverage (default: extracted_data/)
python src/recalculate_summary.py

# Specify custom input directory
python src/recalculate_summary.py --input-dir /path/to/hdf5/files

# Specify custom output file
python src/recalculate_summary.py --output /path/to/summary.json

# Example: Analyze files in a different location and save summary elsewhere
python src/recalculate_summary.py --input-dir ~/Downloads/zuco_extracted --output ~/analysis/zuco_summary.json
```

This verification script:
- Analyzes all HDF5 files to count words with EEG data, frequency bands, and fixation information
- Automatically compares with any existing `extraction_summary_full.json` in the directory
- Shows differences between old and new summaries (useful for verifying consistency)
- Expected coverage is approximately 50-80% of words having EEG recordings

When an existing summary is found, the script will display changes like:
```
Differences from existing summary:
  • Total words: 154,173 → 154,173
  • Words with raw EEG: 107,831 (69.9%) → 107,831 (69.9%)
  • New files added: 2
  • Files with EEG count changes: 5
```

### Resume Interrupted Extraction

The pipeline automatically saves checkpoints. If interrupted, simply run the same command again:

```bash
python src/zuco_extraction_pipeline.py
# Will skip already completed files and resume from last checkpoint
```

## Output Structure

### File Organization

The pipeline creates separate HDF5 files for each subject-task combination:

```
extracted_data/
├── zuco1_ZAB_SR.h5       # ZuCo 1.0: 12 subjects × 3 tasks = 36 files
├── zuco1_ZAB_NR.h5
├── zuco1_ZAB_TSR.h5
├── ...
├── zuco2_YAC_NR.h5       # ZuCo 2.0: 18 subjects × 2 tasks = 36 files
├── zuco2_YAC_TSR.h5
├── ...
├── extraction_summary.json     # Statistics and metadata
└── extraction_checkpoint.json  # Resume tracking
```

### HDF5 Data Structure

Each HDF5 file contains word-level data with preserved sentence context:

```
zuco1_ZAB_SR.h5
├── word_00000/
│   ├── Attributes:
│   │   ├── word_content: "Henry"
│   │   ├── sentence_id: 0
│   │   ├── sentence_content: "Henry Ford, with his son..."
│   │   ├── word_index: 0
│   │   ├── task_name: "SR"
│   │   └── subject_id: "ZAB"
│   ├── raw_eeg         # Shape: (n_fixations, 105 electrodes)
│   ├── frequency_bands/
│   │   ├── FFD_t1      # Theta band 1 (4-6 Hz)
│   │   ├── FFD_t2      # Theta band 2 (6.5-8 Hz)
│   │   ├── FFD_a1      # Alpha band 1 (8.5-10 Hz)
│   │   ├── FFD_a2      # Alpha band 2 (10.5-13 Hz)
│   │   ├── FFD_b1      # Beta band 1 (13.5-18 Hz)
│   │   ├── FFD_b2      # Beta band 2 (18.5-30 Hz)
│   │   ├── FFD_g1      # Gamma band 1 (30.5-40 Hz)
│   │   └── FFD_g2      # Gamma band 2 (40-49.5 Hz)
│   └── eye_tracking/
│       ├── FFD         # First fixation duration
│       ├── TRT         # Total reading time
│       ├── GD          # Gaze duration
│       ├── GPT         # Go-past time
│       ├── SFD         # Single fixation duration
│       └── nFixations  # Number of fixations
├── word_00001/
└── ...
```

## Data Access Examples

### Python - Load extracted data

```python
import h5py
import numpy as np

# Load a specific subject-task file
with h5py.File('extracted_data/zuco1_ZAB_SR.h5', 'r') as f:
    # Access first word
    word_group = f['word_00000']
    
    # Get word and sentence information
    word = word_group.attrs['word_content']
    sentence = word_group.attrs['sentence_content']
    word_position = word_group.attrs['word_index']
    
    # Load EEG data
    raw_eeg = word_group['raw_eeg'][:]  # Shape: (n_fixations, 105)
    
    # Load frequency bands
    theta1 = word_group['frequency_bands/FFD_t1'][:]  # Shape: (105,)
    
    # Load eye-tracking metrics
    ffd = word_group['eye_tracking/FFD'][()]  # Scalar value
    
    print(f"Word: '{word}' at position {word_position}")
    print(f"Sentence: {sentence[:50]}...")
    print(f"Raw EEG shape: {raw_eeg.shape}")
```

### Reconstruct sentences for LLM processing

```python
import h5py
from collections import defaultdict

def get_sentences_from_file(filepath):
    """Reconstruct sentences from word-level data"""
    sentences = defaultdict(list)
    
    with h5py.File(filepath, 'r') as f:
        for word_key in f.keys():
            word_group = f[word_key]
            sent_id = word_group.attrs['sentence_id']
            word_idx = word_group.attrs['word_index']
            word_content = word_group.attrs['word_content']
            
            sentences[sent_id].append((word_idx, word_content))
    
    # Sort words by position and reconstruct
    reconstructed = {}
    for sent_id, words in sentences.items():
        words.sort(key=lambda x: x[0])
        reconstructed[sent_id] = ' '.join([w[1] for w in words])
    
    return reconstructed
```

## Dataset Information

### ZuCo 1.0
- **Subjects**: 12 native English speakers
- **Tasks**: 
  - SR: Sentiment Reading (400 sentences)
  - NR: Normal Reading (300 sentences)
  - TSR: Task-Specific Reading (407 sentences)
- **Known missing data**: ZDN, ZJS, ZPH, ZGW (partial recordings)

### ZuCo 2.0
- **Subjects**: 18 native English speakers
- **Tasks**:
  - NR: Normal Reading (349 sentences)
  - TSR: Task-Specific Reading (349 sentences)
- **Improvements**: Single-session recording (no session effects)

## Technical Details

### Requirements
- **Python 3.8+**: Optimal compatibility with MATLAB file formats (tested with 3.8 and 3.13)
- **Memory**: ~4GB RAM for processing
- **Storage**: ~50GB for raw data, ~10GB for extracted HDF5 files

### Performance
- **Extraction speed**: ~20-30 seconds per subject-task file
- **Compression**: LZF compression (5x faster than gzip)
- **Parallel processing**: Not implemented (files are independent, can run multiple instances)

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

1. **Memory errors during extraction**
   - Solution: The pipeline uses incremental saving to minimize memory usage
   - If issues persist, process fewer files at a time

2. **Missing data warnings**
   - Expected for subjects ZDN, ZJS, ZPH, ZGW in ZuCo 1.0
   - Pipeline handles these gracefully

3. **Deprecation warnings**
   - `nFixations` empty array warning is harmless and can be ignored

4. **HDF5 file corruption**
   - Delete the corrupted file and re-run extraction
   - Checkpoint system will resume from that file

## Citation

If you use this extraction pipeline in your research, please cite:

```bibtex
@article{hollenstein2018zuco,
  title={ZuCo, a simultaneous EEG and eye-tracking resource for natural sentence reading},
  author={Hollenstein, Nora and Rotsztejn, Jonathan and Troendle, Marius and Pedroni, Andreas and Zhang, Ce and Langer, Nicolas},
  journal={Scientific Data},
  volume={5},
  pages={180291},
  year={2018}
}

@article{hollenstein2020zuco2,
  title={ZuCo 2.0: A dataset of physiological recordings during English and Dutch reading},
  author={Hollenstein, Nora and Troendle, Marius and Zhang, Ce and Langer, Nicolas},
  journal={arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.14254},
  year={2020}
}
```

## License

This extraction pipeline is provided under the MIT License. The ZuCo dataset itself has its own licensing terms - please refer to the official ZuCo documentation.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit issues or pull requests.

## Acknowledgments

- ZuCo dataset creators at University of Zurich
- Official ZuCo 2.0 Python scripts provided helpful structure insights
